.TH SYNX 1 "May 2025" "synx 0.2.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
synx \- universal syntax validator and linter dispatcher
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B synx
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILES\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B synx
is a CLI-first universal syntax validator and linter dispatcher built with Rust.
It automatically detects file types and dispatches validation to appropriate
tools and linters. synx provides a unified interface for syntax validation
across multiple programming languages and configuration formats.
.PP
The tool is designed with security in mind, utilizing Rust's memory safety
features and implementing proper sandboxing for executed validators. It supports
both one-time validation and continuous monitoring through watch mode.
.PP
synx automatically detects file types using multiple methods including file
extensions, magic numbers, and content analysis to ensure accurate validation
dispatching.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-watch
Enable watch mode to monitor files for changes and automatically revalidate
them. This is useful during development to get immediate feedback on syntax
errors as you edit files. The tool will continue running until interrupted
with Ctrl+C.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output showing detailed validation results, including which
validators are being used, their output, and performance metrics. This is
helpful for debugging validation issues and understanding what tools are
being executed.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config =\fIFILE\fR
Specify a custom configuration file path. If not provided, synx will look
for configuration files in the following order:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
~/.config/synx/config.toml (user config)
.IP \(bu 2
./synx.toml (project config)
.IP \(bu 2
Built-in defaults
.RE
.TP
.BR \-\-interval =\fISECONDS\fR
Set the file watching interval in seconds (default: 2). This controls how
frequently synx checks for file changes when in watch mode. Lower values
provide faster feedback but use more system resources.
.TP
.BR \-\-init\-config
Generate a default configuration file at ~/.config/synx/config.toml with
all available options documented. This is useful for customizing synx's
behavior for your specific needs.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-strict
Enable strict mode where warnings are treated as errors. This is recommended
for CI/CD pipelines and production environments where code quality standards
must be enforced. In strict mode, synx will exit with non-zero status if
any warnings are detected.
.SH SUPPORTED LANGUAGES AND VALIDATORS
synx supports a comprehensive set of programming languages and file formats.
For each language, it uses the most appropriate and widely-adopted validation
tools:
.SS Programming Languages
.TP
.B Rust
Primary: rustc (syntax and type checking)
Optional: clippy (advanced linting)
Validates: .rs files
.TP
.B C
Primary: gcc with -Wall -pedantic flags
Optional: valgrind (memory leak detection in strict mode)
Validates: .c, .h files
.TP
.B C++
Primary: g++ with -Wall -pedantic flags
Validates: .cpp, .cxx, .cc, .hpp, .hxx files
.TP
.B Java
Primary: javac with -Werror flag
Optional: checkstyle (code style validation)
Validates: .java files
.TP
.B Go
Primary: go vet, gofmt
Optional: golangci-lint (comprehensive linting)
Validates: .go files
.TP
.B Python
Primary: python -m py_compile (syntax checking)
Optional: mypy (type checking), pylint (style and error checking)
Validates: .py, .pyw files
.TP
.B JavaScript
Primary: node --check (syntax validation)
Optional: eslint (linting and style checking)
Validates: .js, .mjs files
.TP
.B TypeScript
Primary: tsc (TypeScript compiler)
Optional: eslint with TypeScript plugins
Validates: .ts, .tsx files
.TP
.B C#
Primary: .NET SDK or Mono compiler
Optional: dotnet format (code formatting)
Validates: .cs files
.SS Configuration and Markup Languages
.TP
.B JSON
Validator: jq (JSON processor and validator)
Validates: .json files
Checks: Valid JSON syntax and structure
.TP
.B YAML
Validator: yamllint
Validates: .yaml, .yml files
Checks: YAML syntax, indentation, and common issues
.TP
.B HTML
Validator: tidy (HTML syntax checker)
Validates: .html, .htm files
Checks: HTML5 compliance and structure
.TP
.B CSS
Validator: csslint
Validates: .css files
Checks: CSS syntax and best practices
.TP
.B XML
Validator: xmllint
Validates: .xml files
Checks: Well-formed XML and DTD validation
.SS Scripts and Configuration
.TP
.B Shell Scripts
Validator: shellcheck
Validates: .sh, .bash, .zsh files and shebang scripts
Checks: Common shell scripting errors and best practices
.TP
.B Dockerfile
Validator: hadolint
Validates: Dockerfile, *.dockerfile files
Checks: Docker best practices and security issues
.SH CONFIGURATION
synx behavior can be customized through configuration files written in TOML
format. The configuration allows you to:
.PP
.IP \(bu 2
Enable or disable specific validators
.IP \(bu 2
Set custom validator command-line options
.IP \(bu 2
Define file type associations
.IP \(bu 2
Configure security policies
.IP \(bu 2
Set timeout values for validators
.PP
Use
.B synx --init-config
to generate a documented configuration file with all available options.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All validations passed successfully
.TP
.B 1
Some validations failed (syntax errors or warnings in strict mode)
.TP
.B 2
Configuration error, missing dependencies, or internal error
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Usage
.TP
Validate a single Python file:
.B synx script.py
.TP
Validate multiple files:
.B synx main.rs config.json style.css
.TP
Validate all files in current directory:
.B synx *
.SS Watch Mode
.TP
Watch a file during development:
.B synx --watch main.rs
.TP
Watch multiple files with custom interval:
.B synx -w --interval 1 src/*.rs
.SS Advanced Usage
.TP
Strict validation with verbose output:
.B synx --strict --verbose config.json
.TP
Use custom configuration:
.B synx --config ./project-synx.toml src/
.TP
Generate default configuration:
.B synx --init-config
.SS Integration Examples
.TP
Pre-commit hook:
.B synx $(git diff --cached --name-only)
.TP
CI/CD pipeline:
.B synx --strict --verbose .
.SH SECURITY
synx implements several security measures:
.PP
.IP \(bu 2
Validator processes run in constrained environments
.IP \(bu 2
File access is limited to specified input files
.IP \(bu 2
Network access is disabled for validators
.IP \(bu 2
Process timeouts prevent hanging validators
.IP \(bu 2
Memory usage limits prevent resource exhaustion
.SH DEPENDENCIES
synx requires various external tools depending on which languages you want
to validate. Install the appropriate tools for your use case:
.PP
.IP \(bu 2
Rust: rustc, cargo (optional: clippy)
.IP \(bu 2
C/C++: gcc, g++
.IP \(bu 2
Python: python3 (optional: mypy, pylint)
.IP \(bu 2
JavaScript/TypeScript: node, npm, tsc
.IP \(bu 2
Java: javac, JDK
.IP \(bu 2
Go: go compiler
.IP \(bu 2
Shell: shellcheck
.IP \(bu 2
Markup: jq, yamllint, tidy
.PP
See the project README for complete installation instructions.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/synx/config.toml
User-specific configuration file
.TP
.I ./synx.toml
Project-specific configuration file
.TP
.I ~/.cache/synx/
Cache directory for validation results
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B SYNX_CONFIG
Override default configuration file path
.TP
.B SYNX_CACHE_DIR
Override default cache directory
.TP
.B SYNX_LOG_LEVEL
Set logging level (error, warn, info, debug, trace)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rustc (1),
.BR gcc (1),
.BR node (1),
.BR python3 (1),
.BR shellcheck (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR yamllint (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Alex \(laqueue alexngugi.dev@gmail.com \(raqueue
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs, feature requests, and contribute at:
.UR https://github.com/A5873/synx
.UE
.PP
When reporting bugs, please include:
.IP \(bu 2
synx version (synx --version)
.IP \(bu 2
Operating system and version
.IP \(bu 2
Command that caused the issue
.IP \(bu 2
Expected vs actual behavior
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2025 Alex. Licensed under the MIT License.
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
